## About the Author

<!-- image -->

Marty Hall is a Senior Computer Scientist in the Research and Technology Development  Center  at the Johns Hopkins  University  Applied  Physics Lab,  where  he  specializes  in  applications of Java and Web technology. He also  teaches  Java  and  Web  programming in  the Johns  Hopkins  part-time graduate  program  in  Computer  Science, where he directs the Distributed Computing and Web Technology con- centration  areas.  When  he  gets  a  chance,  he  also  teaches  industry  short courses  on  servlets,  JavaServer  Pages,  and  other  Java  technology  areas. Marty's previous book is Core Web Programming (Prentice Hall, 1998). He can be reached at the following address:

Research and Technology Development Center The Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory 11100 Johns Hopkins Road Laurel, MD 20723 hall@coreservlets.com

Chapter n  early  1996,  I  started  using  the  Java  programming  language  for  the majority  of  my  software  development work.  I did some CGI  programming and even worked a little with the early servlet versions, but for the most part I did desktop and client-side applications. Over the last couple of years, however, there has been a growing emphasis on server-side applications, so I became more serious about servlets and JavaServer Pages. In the past year, there has been a virtual stampede toward the technology among developers, server vendors, and the authors of the Java platform specifications. So much so, in fact, that the technology is rapidly becoming the standard tool for building dynamic Web sites and connecting Web front ends to databases and applications on a server. I

Unfortunately,  however,  it  was  extremely  difficult  to  find  good  practical advice on servlet and JSP development. I found a number of servlet books, but only a handful of them covered recent versions of the specification, advanced techniques, or reflected real-world experience. The few that did, if they covered JSP at all, hadn't caught up to JSP 1.0, let alone JSP 1.1. Since JSP is a better fit than servlets for many situations, what good was a servlet book that didn't also cover JSP? In the last couple of months, some JSP books have started coming out. But the bulk of them don't cover servlets. What good is that? Since an integral part of JavaServer Pages is the use of scripting elements to create servlet  code, you can't  do effective  JSP  development without a thorough understanding of servlets. Besides, most real-world sites don't use just one of the two