## Introduction

technologies; they combine them both . Finally, as I discovered when I started teaching  servlet  and  JSP  development  to my  students  in  the  Johns  Hopkins part-time graduate program (most of whom were professional software developers),  few  programmers  were  already comfortable  with HTTP 1.1, HTML forms, and JDBC, three critical supporting technologies. Telling them to get a separate book for each of these areas was hardly reasonable: that brought to five the number of books programmers needed if they were going to do serious servlet/JSP development.

So, in mid-1999, I put together a short servlet and JSP tutorial with a few dozen examples, put it on the Web, and tried out the material in a couple of my courses. The response was overwhelming. After only a few months, I was getting several thousand visitors a day to the tutorial along with a myriad of requests to expand the coverage of the material. I eventually bowed to the inevitable and started writing. This book is the result. I hope you find it useful.

## Real Code for Real Programmers

This book is aimed at serious software developers. This is not a book that touts the potential of e-commerce or pontificates about how Web-enabled applications will revolutionize your business. Instead, it is a hands-on book aimed at helping programmers who are already convinced of the need for dynamic Web sites get started building them right away. In showing how to build these sites, I try to illustrate the most important approaches and warn you of the most common pitfalls. Along the way, I include plenty of working code: more than a hundred documented Java classes, for instance. I try to give detailed examples of the most important and frequently used features, summarize  the  lesser-used  ones,  and  refer  you  to  the  APIs  (available on-line) for a few of the rarely used ones.

Nor  is  this  a  book  that  skims  dozens  of  technologies  at  a  high  level. Although I don't claim that this is a definitive reference on every technology it touches on (e.g., there are a number of books this size just on JDBC), if the book covers a topic, it does so in enough detail for you to sit down and start writing real programs. The one exception to this rule is the Java programming language itself. Although I don't assume any familiarity with server-side programming, I do expect you to be familiar with  the basics of Java language development. If you're not, you will need to pick up a good tutorial like Core Java , Core Web Programming , or Thinking in Java .